Proposal: Resolve Aurora v1.2 ISA Reconciliation Questions

Status: Proposed for architecture review
Scope: Hardware loops, AGU opcode space, stream-control operations, POPMETA, LOOPR, MAC/MAS operands, document precedence, and machine-readable ISA confidence metadata.

This proposal addresses the unresolved items identified during reconciliation of the Aurora documentation and canonical machine-readable ISA database.

The goals are to:

bring the database into agreement with locked architecture decisions;
eliminate stale or placeholder instruction definitions;
preserve opcode space unless an operation provides clear architectural value;
make the machine-readable ISA the reliable basis for future assembler, simulator, documentation, and RTL generation;
distinguish settled decisions from benchmark candidates and unresolved assumptions.
1. Correct opcodes 0xC0 and 0xC1
Proposal

Replace the provisional database entries:

0xC0  LOOPSET
0xC1  LOOPEND

with:

0xC0  LOOP #count
0xC1  NOP

The earlier LOOPSET/LOOPEND design is superseded.

LOOP establishes a low-overhead hardware loop over the following NOP-terminated instruction body. The later eight-word loop-window decision extends the supported captured body size without changing the basic LOOP/NOP encoding model.

Required action

Update all machine-readable ISA representations, opcode tables, instruction descriptions, encoder definitions, decoder definitions, and generated documentation.

This is a mechanical correction rather than a new architecture decision.

2. Retire AGUCFG and STRIDE
Proposal

Remove the placeholder definitions:

0xC2  AGUCFG
0xC3  STRIDE

Do not resurrect the older eight-instruction general-purpose AGU class as part of the baseline ISA.

The old AGU operations substantially overlap existing facilities:

ordinary ADD, shift, mask, load, and store operations;
Q0/Q1 stream stride and circular-address generation;
stream configuration registers;
stack and memory-bound checking;
the MPU and system-control mechanisms.

The old AGUCFG and STRIDE entries lack complete encoding and semantic definitions and should not remain in the canonical database as placeholders.

Proposed opcode-class state
0xC0  LOOP
0xC1  NOP
0xC2  LOOPR
0xC3–0xC9 reserved

Unused space should remain reserved rather than being filled solely because an older draft listed possible operations.

3. Resolve document precedence
Problem

AUR-ARCH-004 is marked Frozen, but portions of it predate newer accepted ADRs and conflict with the current hardware-loop, stream, and instruction-reference decisions.

Proposal

Adopt this authority order:

1. Accepted Architecture Decision Records
2. Current canonical machine-readable architecture database
3. Current canonical architecture and instruction specifications
4. Generated instruction references, opcode maps, diagrams, and summaries
5. Historical, superseded, or exploratory documents
Required action

Mark the present AUR-ARCH-004 revision:

Superseded — pending regeneration

Then:

update the canonical machine-readable ISA;
reconcile it against all accepted ADRs;
regenerate AUR-ARCH-004 from the corrected source;
validate the regenerated document;
freeze the new revision.

A document’s old Frozen status must not override a newer accepted ADR.

4. Do not add all legacy stream-management operations as opcodes

The older documentation lists:

QADDR
QCOUNT
QSYNC
QSTAT
QCLR
QON
QOFF
Proposal

Do not allocate individual opcodes for all of these operations.

Expose as stream system registers

Use the system-register access mechanism for state such as:

Q0.ADDR_NEXT
Q0.ADDR_LAST
Q0.ORD_NEXT
Q0.ORD_LAST
Q0.COUNT
Q0.STATUS

Q1.ADDR_NEXT
Q1.ADDR_LAST
Q1.ORD_NEXT
Q1.ORD_LAST
Q1.COUNT
Q1.STATUS
Configuration and reset

Stream enable, disable, reset, and clear behavior should be expressed through QCFG or writable stream-control registers rather than separate QON, QOFF, and QCLR instructions.

DMA synchronization

Do not adopt QSYNC as a stream opcode.

DMA synchronization should use:

DMA status;
completion and error events;
interrupts;
WFE;
explicit buffer-ownership protocols.

This keeps stream traversal, computation, and DMA transport separate.

5. Allocate POPMETA at 0xB9
Proposal

Allocate:

POPMETA Rd:Rd+1, Qn, meta

at stream subopcode:

0xB9
Semantics

POPMETA atomically pops one logical stream item and returns both its data and associated metadata.

Rd     = popped stream data
Rd+1   = selected metadata

The destination must be an aligned even/odd register pair.

The initial metadata selections should include:

ORD   logical element ordinal
ADDR  source memory address
Architectural requirements
Rd must be even.
The stream selector chooses Q0 or Q1.
The data and metadata are committed atomically.
The stream advances exactly once.
A fault produces no partial destination-register update.
A fault produces no partial stream-state update.
For a packed group, ORD identifies the first lane.
Packed lane k corresponds to ordinal ORD + k.
Address metadata represents the address associated with the popped data according to the selected stream format.
Rationale

POPMETA is useful beyond argmin and argmax. It supports:

indexed filtering;
parsers;
sparse-data processing;
event streams;
source-position tracking;
diagnostics;
associating values with their original memory locations.

It should therefore be retained even if a future fused tracking operation is also adopted.

6. Keep TRACKMIN and TRACKMAX reserved
Proposal

Do not add TRACKMIN or TRACKMAX to the baseline ISA yet.

Retain them as benchmark candidates.

The generic sequence is already compact:

POPMETA  Rnew:Rnewidx, Q0, ORD
CMP      Rbest, Rnew
CMOV.LT  Rbest, Rnew
CMOV.LT  Rbestidx, Rnewidx

This sequence:

uses ordinary reusable instructions;
fits inside the eight-word replay window;
avoids introducing another specialized execution path;
permits explicit control over tie-breaking.

A fused instruction should be added only if benchmarks demonstrate that the generic sequence is a material bottleneck in representative Aurora workloads.

TRACKMIN  reserved, not encoded
TRACKMAX  reserved, not encoded
7. Formally define LOOPR
Proposal

Make the register-count loop form a real instruction:

LOOPR Rs

Allocate it at:

0xC2
Semantics

LOOPR Rs repeats the following NOP-terminated loop body using the unsigned iteration count supplied in Rs.

It uses the same hardware-loop machinery and restrictions as immediate LOOP.

Requirements
The body may occupy up to eight contiguous 16-bit instruction words.
Extension words count toward the eight-word limit.
The first terminating NOP marks a short body.
A full eight-word body may terminate implicitly at the end of the captured window.
Hardware loops are not nestable.
Loop bodies may not contain prohibited control-transfer or serializing operations.
Precise interrupts preserve hardware-loop state.
Context save and restore preserve hardware-loop state.
No instruction pairing occurs across the iteration wrap.
Legal pairing remains permitted inside the body.
The register count represents the actual iteration count.
A zero count is illegal or must be checked by software before executing LOOPR.
Rationale

Immediate-only loop counts are insufficient for runtime-sized:

arrays;
DMA blocks;
stream buffers;
audio frames;
image rows;
communication packets;
dynamically sized DSP kernels.
8. Correct MAC/MAS operand typing
Proposal

Define MAC and MAS as:

MAC Ad, Ra, Rb
MAS Ad, Ra, Rb

where Ad is an accumulator selector rather than an ordinary GPR destination.

Semantics
MAC Ad, Ra, Rb:
    Ad ← Ad + Ra × Rb

MAS Ad, Ra, Rb:
    Ad ← Ad - Ra × Rb

There is no normal GPR destination writeback.

Database correction

Replace:

operands:
  - dst
  - Ra
  - Rb

with:

operands:
  - accumulator
  - Ra
  - Rb

The instruction still has three explicit assembly operands, but the first operand’s type must be accumulator, not gpr_destination.

For complex MAC mode, A0 and A1 may operate as the real/imaginary accumulator pair according to the existing complex-mode rules.

9. Add confidence and provenance metadata to the ISA database
Proposal

Every instruction and encoding field that is not fully settled should carry explicit confidence and source information.

Suggested fields:

operand_spec_confidence: documented | inferred | unresolved
encoding_spec_confidence: documented | inferred | unresolved
semantic_spec_confidence: documented | inferred | unresolved

sources:
  - ADR-...
  - DDR-...
  - AUR-ARCH-...

notes: ...
Tooling behavior
documented

The field is supported directly by accepted architecture documentation.

Normal generation is allowed.

inferred

The field is derived from encoding constraints, analogy, or surrounding design but is not explicitly documented.

Generation is allowed only with validation warnings.

unresolved

The field is not sufficiently specified.

Production generation of the affected encoder, RTL decoder, or architectural test should fail until the issue is resolved.

Rationale

This prevents reasonable-looking assumptions from silently becoming permanent hardware contracts.

Proposed decision summary

Approve the following baseline changes:

0xC0 = LOOP
0xC1 = NOP
0xC2 = LOOPR

LOOPSET retired
LOOPEND retired
AGUCFG retired
STRIDE retired

0xC3–0xC9 remain reserved

0xB9 = POPMETA

Legacy QADDR/QCOUNT/QSTAT state exposed through system registers
QCLR/QON/QOFF behavior handled through QCFG/control registers
QSYNC rejected as a stream opcode

MAC/MAS operand 0 is an accumulator selector, not a GPR destination

AUR-ARCH-004 is marked superseded pending regeneration

Machine-readable ISA fields receive confidence and provenance metadata

Keep the following outside the baseline:

TRACKMIN / TRACKMAX
Status: reserved for benchmarking
Required repository updates after approval

The implementation agent should:

Create an ADR covering the ISA decisions in this proposal.
Create a DDR covering documentation and database reconciliation.
Update ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_LOG_CURRENT.
Update DOCUMENTATION_DECISION_LOG_CURRENT.
Update the canonical JSON, YAML, and CSV ISA databases.
Update C and Verilog opcode definitions.
Update assembler and disassembler tables.
Update instruction operand schemas.
Update simulator decode and semantics.
Update RTL decode specifications.
Update the opcode map.
Update the instruction reference.
Mark the old AUR-ARCH-004 revision as superseded.
Regenerate AUR-ARCH-004.
Add encoding and semantic tests for LOOP, NOP, LOOPR, and POPMETA.
Add validation that POPMETA requires an even destination register.
Add validation that retired mnemonics cannot be assembled.
Add validation for MAC/MAS accumulator operands.
Preserve TRACKMIN and TRACKMAX only as reserved benchmark notes.
Report every modified file and any unresolved encoding issue before committing.
Copy-paste instruction for the repository agent
Review and implement the proposal titled
“Resolve Aurora v1.2 ISA Reconciliation Questions.”

Treat the proposal as approved architecture direction, but do not silently
invent instruction-bit layouts where the proposal does not provide enough
encoding information.

Create the required ADR and DDR, update both consolidated decision logs,
correct all machine-readable ISA formats, update generated and handwritten
documentation, and update assembler, simulator, RTL decode specifications,
and tests where present.

Specifically:

- Replace 0xC0 LOOPSET with LOOP.
- Replace 0xC1 LOOPEND with ordinary NOP.
- Retire AGUCFG and STRIDE.
- Allocate 0xC2 to LOOPR.
- Reserve 0xC3 through 0xC9.
- Allocate stream subopcode 0xB9 to POPMETA.
- Do not add the old QADDR/QCOUNT/QSYNC/QSTAT/QCLR/QON/QOFF opcode set.
- Represent stream state through system registers and QCFG/control state.
- Keep TRACKMIN and TRACKMAX reserved and unencoded.
- Change MAC/MAS operand 0 from a GPR destination to an accumulator selector.
- Add documented/inferred/unresolved confidence and source metadata.
- Mark the stale AUR-ARCH-004 revision superseded and prepare a regenerated version.

Before changing files, produce an implementation plan identifying:
1. every affected file,
2. every generated artifact,
3. every encoding field that remains ambiguous,
4. every test that must be added or updated.

After implementation, run all available ISA validation, opcode-collision,
encoder, decoder, and documentation consistency checks. Return the changed
file list, validation results, and a unified diff. Do not modify unrelated
architecture decisions.